== Overview
CollectSNMP is an application that 
 * Runs Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) queries,
 * Creates and updates corresponding Round-Robin Database (RRD) files,
 * Generates, updates, and indexes DRRAW (http://web.taranis.org/drraw/) graphs,
 * Supports plugin-like extensions that add custom tasks and SNMP data writers 


== Usage
Install, include, run: 
 * gem install collectsnmp

 * require 'collectsnmp'
And/or
 * collectsnmp <xml-configuration>


== Description
CollectSNMP was written to replace collectd[http://collectd.org/]. Unlike collectd, CollectSNMP focuses exclusively on Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SNMP]) data collection and Round Robin Database (RRD[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RRDtool]) file management. Also, {unlike collectd}[http://www.mail-archive.com/collectd%40verplant.org/msg00500.html], CollectSNMP is able query vendor-specific SNMP MIBs[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Management_information_base].

Working in tandem, CollectSNMP and DRRAW[http://web.taranis.org/drraw/] provide a comprehensive network monitoring solution similar to MRTG[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MRTG], Criket[http://cricket.sourceforge.net/], and Cacti[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cacti_%28software%29].

CollectSNMP works with four data structure types: data class, host class, writer object and task object. 

An instance of data class is comprised of {SNMP OIDs}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_identifier] that described the monitored object. Data class has the following class variables: _name_ - reference name, _instance_ - SNMP name information OID, _values_ - SNMP value OIDs delimitated by space, _dst_ - data type (e.g. counter or gauge), and _range_ - data range.

A host class object contains information about the host responding to SNMP queries. Host class variables are: _name_ - reference name, _idprefix_ - numerical ID to be used for DRRAW indexing, _address+ - IP address of the host, _version_ - SNMP protocol version to be used to construct queries, and _community_ - SNMP community query parameter.

Writer base class is a parent class extended to customize record saving processes. CSV and RRD writer classes are both extensions of the base writer class. CSV writer saves SNMP query results into {Comma-Separated Values}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values] formatted files. RRD writer saves SNMP query results into {Round Robin Database}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RRDtool] formatted files.

Task objects carry out the bulk of CollectSNMP work. Base task class provides common task functionality - exception handling and logging. Hub task class controls the operation of other tasks. DRRAW task updated DRRAW configuration based on collected SNMP data. By querying a set of data objects on a given host object, a poll task collects SNMP records writes collected records using specified writers.


== Example

The example program bin/collectsnmp reads an XML configuration and runs background execution of configured SNMP polling tasks. A typical SNMP polling tasks runs an SNMP walk request on a group of OIDs and writes the results into RRD files.


== Example XML configuration file

{
  <snmp>
  <datatypes type="array">
  <datadef>
    <name>ifmib-if-octets64</name>
    <instance>1.3.6.1.2.1.31.1.1.1.1</instance>
    <values>1.3.6.1.2.1.31.1.1.1.6 1.3.6.1.2.1.31.1.1.1.10</values>
    <dst>COUNTER</dst>
    <range>0:U</range>
  </datadef>
  <datadef>
  <hosts type="array">
    <hostdef>
      <name>host1</name>
      <idprefix>111</idprefix>
      <address>1.1.1.1</address>
      <version>2c</version>
      <community>public</community>
    </hostdef>
  </hosts>
  <writers type="array">
    <writerdef>
      <type>RRD</type>
      <config>
        <name>RRD1</name>
        <rra>RRA:AVERAGE:0.5:1:4608 RRA:AVERAGE:0.5:5:4032</rra>
        <write_path>/some/log/path</write_path>
        <interval>150</interval>
      </config>
    </writerdef>
  </writers>
  <tasks type="array">
    <taskdef>
      <type>Poll</type>
      <config>
        <name>collect-host1</name>
        <log_path>/some/log/path</log_path>
        <host>host1</host>
        <data>ifmib-if-octets64</data>
        <interval>150</interval>
        <writers>RRD1</writers>
      </config>
    </taskdef>
    <taskdef>
      <type>Drraw</type>
      <config>
        <name>drraw</name>
        <interval>150</interval>
        <log_path>/some/log/path</log_path>
        <drraw_path>/some/drraw/path</drraw_path>
        <rrd_path>/some/rrd/path</rrd_path>
        <erb_path>/some/erb/path</erb_path>
      </config>
    </taskdef>
  </tasks>
  </snmp>
}

== Copying
CollectSNMP is Copyright (c) 2010,2011 by Artem Veremey.

CollectSNMP is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License v2. CollectSNMP is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY. 

== Contact
Author:: Artem Veremey (artem@veremey.net)